[Music]
Well, thank you all very much uh for
coming today. I'd like to thank the
trustees for their kind invitation
uh to invite me here to share with you
um some of our most recent um
observations and treatments or approach
to manage uh cancer.
Um,
I'm at Boston College, a Jesuit
university in Chesnel Hill,
Massachusetts. I am not at Boston
University. Many people make that
mistake. That's another university down
on Commonwealth Avenue. Just wanted to
make sure that distinction was clear.
Um what I'm going to do is just go over
uh some background information on cancer
and uh where we stand in in our uh
attempt uh to manage uh this disorder.
So here you see the data uh on dead
people uh people diagnosed and who have
died or projected to die uh from cancer.
Um, these data come from the American
Cancer Society. One of their main goals
is to log the dead every year. They they
do other things but predominantly tell
us how many people are going to die or
have already died. And you can see these
are the numbers from 2013 to 2025.
The 2025 numbers are the projected
numbers will will be dead by the end of
the year. Um, you can see a steady
increase number of cases from 2013.
There's a percentage increase here. Um
when we take the total numbers of deaths
per year and divide that by 365,
uh you can see that we have about uh
1,700 people in the United States dying
uh every day. A and if you divide that
by 24 hours, 24 you get about 70 people
per hour in the United States uh are
dying from cancer. Um and people, you
know, what's going on? Why why do we
it's a relentless
number of people dying uh every every
year and every day you know and what's
really interesting is um we hear every
year how much new more money is given to
cancer research okay um NIH National
Cancer Institute we always boast about
how much more money we spend on cancer
pink ribbon campaigns the Susan Coleman
breast cancer uh everybody's exced
excited by how much money new money we
raise every year and all we get is more
dead people. So what what what the hell
is going on here? You know, we have made
raising money for cancer
an end in itself rather than a means to
an end. Success is determined by how
much money we raise, not on whether or
not we drop the death rate. And that's
kind of unusual. Um, where is the
accountability? No one seems to be
concerned about, okay, I'm giving you
all this money year in and year out, and
all we do is get more, get people. And
then they say, oh, no, we're making
tremendous progress. Um, and this is
their evidence for the 33% reduction in
cancer deaths in the United States since
uh 1991.
Um, see, look at the progress we're
making. And they'll come on and say
we're making tremendous. If you'll
notice, this was the beginning of the
antismoking campaign.
The progress we have made is
predominantly in the area of prevention.
It's not in the area of new drug
development.
Remember that it tells you. So those red
lines are how many people more would
have died if we didn't stop uh the
smoking.
So we want to now talk about the origin.
How do we get cancer? You know what's
going on? Um cancer is defined simply as
disregulated cell growth. That's what
cancer is. Disregulated cell growth. Um
caused by genetic mutations. I should
say is it caused by genetic mutations or
is it caused by chronic insufficient
respiration coupled to compensatory
fermentation which I will break down.
So you all know we're all on the same
page.
So we have to talk about scientific
theories because it's the theories of
how we understand science
that move fields forward. So a
scientific theory is simply an attempt
to explain the facts of nature.
Reality is based on replicated facts
whereas the interpretation of the facts
is based on credible theories.
Credible theories move science forward
whereas flawed theories stall scientific
progress. Let's look at some historical
examples.
This is um what I'm showing here is the
heliocentric theory
uh that was put out by Capernicus
uh Kepler Galileo uh could explain
better the movements of the celestial
bodies in our solar system than could
the geocentric theory of Aristotle and
Claudius Tmi
tommy and his group they use very
sophisticated mathematics to try to
attempt to deter determine where planets
would be at any given point during the
year. This mathematics led to epicycles,
deference and equants. Very very
complicated mathematics. Capernacus was
attempting to use the same mathematics
to uh improve our understanding of the
movement of the planets. But he made an
remarkable uh change in thinking.
Instead of keeping the earth as the
center of the solar system, he made the
earth simply another planet putting the
sun in the center of the solar system.
And all of a sudden all this complexity
seemed to be much less the system became
much less complex. Kepler knew that it
was not simple circles. They were
eclipse ellipticals. And of course
Galileo chose to use the telescope to
better plot the positions of the planet.
He saw the moons of Jupiter and things
started to fall into place in our
understanding of where we are in the
solar system and in the universe. The
guy on the bottom, if anybody doesn't
remember who he was, that's Gadano
Bruno.
Uh Bruno was a heretic in the Catholic
Church uh for many different reasons,
but he also subscribed heavily to the
Capernacian theory uh of the
organization of the solar system. And
unfortunately, that was too much for the
church at that time to deal with. So
they burned him alive in Plaza Fury in
Rome. and we have a statue to him uh in
that plaza and he has been recognized as
a martyr for science.
The germ theory of um Lewis Pastor could
explain better the origin of contagious
diseases than could the bad air miasma
theory of Galen leading to the
development of uh ways to stop vaccines
and antibiotics and things like this
advance major advance in our
understanding. The Darwin Wallace theory
of evolution by natural selection could
explain better the origin of species
than could the theory of special
creation moving the field of biology
into a serious discipline.
The the the problem we have confronted
with us today. Can the mitochondrial
metabolic theory explain better the
origin and management of cancer than can
the sematic mutation theory? And I
consider this just as important as the
previous theories that I just went over.
Does cancer arise from nucleiosematic
mutations or from chronic mitochondrial
dysfunction with compensatory
fermentation?
So we have a picture here of uh a cell
that you see in biology textbooks to
give students an idea what the mamalian
cell looks like. It has a membrane. It
has a big nucleus and it has these
little bean-shaped organels called
mitochondria.
That's what it looks like in a textbook.
But when you look on here, that's what
it would look like under a microscope
where mitochondria have been identified
with a tag. Mitochondria are like a
spaghetti network inside cells. They
have very active. They fuse. They
together, they separate. They move
around and they respond to their
environment in remarkable ways.
Today, the current dogma in cancer is
that cancer is a genetic disease. A
dogma is an irrefutable truth, something
that should never no longer be
questioned. And this paper hallmarks of
cancer the next generation by Hannah
Hanan Weineberg is one of the most
highly cited if not the most cited paper
in all of science. Over 75,000 citations
to this paper and the statement from the
paper says cancer cells carry the
ankcogenic and tumor suppressor
mutations that define cancer as a
genetic disease. And this is what we see
in all biology textbooks, cell biology,
biochemistry
and genetics. Cancer is a genetic
disease. um the the US National Science
National Cancer Site uh NCI National
Cancer Institute solidification of the
dogma. If you say up there how does how
does cancer develop? It says it says
cancer is a genetic disease that is
currently
that is caused by changes in genes that
control the way cells function. And down
down here it says even more uh cancer is
caused by certain changes to genes. So
so there's no discussion about anything
else other than cancer is a genetic
disease. And most people in the world
when asked on the street, do you any
know anything about cancer? Yeah, it's a
genetic disease.
Well, let's look at the evidence that
challenges that particular viewpoint.
Listen, whenever you try to challenge a
a a dogma,
it's pretty much ignored. Um, people
don't want to hear look at it. They
don't want to talk about it. They don't
want to hear about it. They just simply
ignore it. It's too controversial and
disturbing to consider something that
you have solidified in your brain as
being the truth. And that's what I said
here. Ideological dogma and confirmation
bias prevent rational thinking. We are a
species who are supposed to think
rationally. But I'll tell you one thing,
ideological dogma is one of the most
powerful forces that we know of uh in
our as a as our in our in our um
existence. So now let's go through
the evidence that kind of doesn't make
sense
according to the dogma. Now, I have
references here and I I don't want you
to simply listen to what I have to say
because you heard it from me. You should
read the papers yourself. You you you're
all cognitively capable of doing this.
Most people don't read the original
research articles. They rely what do you
think? What do you think? Oh, yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. No, read the damn
papers yourself
and make your own decision. So we have a
number of studies that have been done
where they can't find any mutations. Not
many, but they're there. And every one
of those papers that look do all the
studies and they find one sample or few
samples that don't have any mutations.
They ignore them. They don't discuss
them. It's unbelievable. I have the
papers here. Please read them. You'll
find in those papers that there are some
cancers they found that we didn't look
hard enough. The search still continues.
So you can't pro prove anything by
negative data. So what the field did as
we began our revolution in technology is
we separated certain genes. Some are
passengers that just kind of hang
around, don't do anything. But the real
bad ones that cause disregulated cell
growth are called driver genes. Oh wow.
Okay, we got drivers now. Drivers and
passengers and all this kind of stuff.
And then and then we said, "Yeah, that
makes a lot of sense." until our
technology improved even further and we
were able to show that we have a lot of
driver gene mutations in normal tissues.
P-53, that loving mutation everybody
talks about. Pathological mutations are
found in normal cells of people with
p-53. No disregulated cell growth. Wow.
Oh, that's that's a little harder to
explain. Now we have these driver genes
in normal tissues that don't form
disregulated cell growth. Wow, that's So
what do we do? Uh the search still must
continue. Maybe there's something beyond
the driver gene in the dark matter of
the genome. Oh,
okay. Let's start looking at dark
matter. Just like the universe, we're
looking at dark matter in the genome to
hunt for the ever elusive genes that
cause cancer.
Then we have some cancers that can be
caused by uh carcinogens like asbestous
that don't cause mutations. That's
interesting. Uh we have the rarity of
cancer in our aboriginal ancestors and
fil even to this day we have tribes in
Africa in certain remote areas that
follow their traditional ways. And
cancer is very rare in these people. How
do we know? Because Albert Schwitzer
checked it out. The great humanitarian
physician specifically looking for
cancer. He said, "Wow, these Africans,
man, they're really healthy. They have
all kinds of parasites and other things,
but they don't seem to have cancer."
And other scientists in different parts
of the world have made similar
observations.
Uh, and then we have the rarity of
cancer in our closest biological
relative, the chimpanzeee. 98% similar
to us in protein and gene sequences.
There's never been a documented case of
breast cancer in a female chimpanzeee.
And yet, breast cancer is one of the
leading killers of of women uh in our
societies.
The nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments to me are the most
devastating and most powerful evidence
against the gene somatic mutation theory
of cancer.
These are simple experiments that were
done by Israel and Schaefer at
University of Vermont uh some years ago.
They had to scratch their head uh about
the results that they got. Anyway, the
green cell on top, a normal cell. This
was an epithelial cell taken from a
liver of a rat. um it didn't look
abnormal. Uh they grew it in culture for
many many generations and the red cell
there looked uh looked abnormal uh in
its ways growth and the way it looked
and they said something's wrong with
this and they put it under the skin of a
rat and 12 out of 13 experiments showed
a tumor developing from that cell. So
the scientists said, "Oh, something must
have happened when we cultured the
original from the original uh normal
cell or perhaps the original normal cell
was mutant. We didn't know about it." So
they went back and took the original
normal cell and then put that cell under
the skin of the rat and they only had
they had no tumors out of 11 separate
experiments. Then they said, "Let's try
something different. Let's move the
nucleus from the tumor cell into a
normal cytoplasm. And let's move the
nucleus of the nor of the normal cell
into a tumor cytoplasm. And that's what
you see. So when you take the red
nucleus and put it into the normal
cytoplasm, only one out of 72
independent experiments formed a tumor.
Whereas on the other hand, when you took
the normal nucleus and put it into the
tumor cytoplasm,
66 out of 68 experiments gave us a
tumor. and 97%.
Scratch your head. What the hell is
going on here? You should have gotten
just the opposite results, not these
results.
So, what do we do? Epigenetics. Oh. Oh,
of course. Of course. With epigenetics,
anything can be everything and its
opposite. It's a very complicated field
of genetics and everybody has a
different outcome when you'll start
looking at it. But there wasn't only in
vitro and these are in vitro vivo
experiments.
We we also have the work of of Dr.
McKinnel and his colleagues where they
were studying these kidney kidney tumors
in frogs lethal uh kidney tumors that's
the frog with the big tumor there in his
kidney and amphibian neur uh embryology
was of course well advanced so McKinnel
I had the chance to speak with him
before he passed away talked a lot about
these experiments with him he wasn't
interested in testing the sematic
mutation theory he was just asking
whether the nucleus of a cancer cell
could direct development that was his
thing and then when I asked him I said
do you realize that your result results
kind of challenged the sematic mutation
theory. He goes, "When you put it that
way, yeah."
So, what he did was he took the nucleus
out of the
the kidney tumor and put it into a
enucleiated fertilized egg and lo and
behold, they cloned or they develop a
tadpole
completely normal developed from the
nucleus of the kidney tumor.
Uh there was no abnormalities in that
tadpole at all. And then when I asked
him, he said, "You know what I also did?
I cut the tail off the damn tadpole and
it they regrow their tail. They
regenerate their tail. Perfectly normal,
all driven by the nucleus of the tumor
cell." He said the only problem with
this experiment was the tadpole never
could develop into a mature frog because
there was something in the nucleus of
the tumor cell that prevented complete
development but did not cause
disregulated cell growth. Oh,
interesting.
Now Rudy Aish and his group at MIT are
the world lead I Rudy is one of the best
in the world in mamlian developmental
biology. So Rudy says all that stuff
that we saw in the from the there was
other frogs and things like this he said
I don't believe it until I actually do
it myself. So he said okay he went back
and he did it. He cloned a mouse from
the nucleus of a melanoma. He took the
nucleus of the melanoma skin cancer and
put it into a embryionic stem cell and
there's the mouse that was cloned that
embryionic that mouse there. I know it's
a it's kind of a it's it hasn't gone
through several stages of development
and then it of course aborted as well
but it never can complete the full
process of development because there
were a lot of chromosomeal and
mutational defects in the nucleus that
prevented development but did not cause
disregulated cell growth.
These findings are inconsistent
with what the sematic mutation theory
tells us is the origin of cancer.
So what I did is I put all this stuff
together. I let a lot of other people do
the work for me, right? All I had to do
is look at the data. I said, I have a
completely different interpretation of
this because they were all interested in
a different question. They were not
challenging the sematic mutation theory
of cancer. I'm looking at the results
and I'm saying these data are rock solid
against the sematic mutation theory
and they were repeated over and over
again by the best developmental
biologists in the world. So these
weren't hacks that were doing these
experiments and they were publishing in
the top journals. So of course I then
summarized all this research in this
diagram that many of you may have seen
all over the internet. So normal cells
beget normal cells. They have a great
interate interactive genome. The genome
looks great. The mitochondria there
normal structure and function and they
have regulated growth not disregulated
growth. Tumor cell on the other hand
tumor cells beget tumor cells they have
genetic abnormalities most of them in
the nucleus and they have abnormalities
in the number structure and function of
the mitochondria and they have
disregulated growth. So the test was of
course move the red nucleus into the
green cytoplasm and see which should
drive this regulated cell growth doesn't
you get regulated growth you saw that
from the evidence I presented. You take
the green nucleus of the normal cell and
drop it into the cytoplasm of the
malignant tumor cell and you get either
dead cells or cells with disregulated
cell growth. These are the exact
opposite results that you would have
expected if if if cancer were a a
genetic disease.
How how much more evidence do you need?
Right? What the hell do you need? Oh,
no. No. So, what they say it has to be
repeated. What
did you read the this evidence? No, I
didn't read. It has to be repeated. One
person said, top guy, if these
experiments are right, the whole cancer
field must be turned upside down.
Therefore, they can't be right.
And that is the truth. And I will not
name the person who said that.
If sematic mutations are not the origin
of cancer, how do we get how do we get
cancer? And that was shown many years
ago by the distinguished scientist Otto
Warberg from Germany. A fan I don't have
time to talk about his history. A lot of
great books written about Otto. He he
was a half Jew. Uh he knew that Hitler
knew he was spared during the the
Holocaust. He was spared during the
Second World War because Hitler said if
anybody's going to cure cancer on this
planet, Otto Warberg would be the one
doing it. So he let Warberg continue his
work in Berlin during the war. Well,
during the 20s, Otto said cancer cells,
all cancer cells arise from in
insufficiency of of cellular
respiration, which is oxidative
phosphorilation. Energy through lactic
acid fermentation compensates. If you're
taking away one form of energy, you got
to compensate with another, which is a
fermentation metabolism, which became
aerobic fermentation. Some people call
it the Warberg effect. I put this in red
because this is our major contribution
to the field. We cleaned up a lot of the
mess and misunderstanding that Warberg
was confronted with. We also found a
second fuel that could be fermented
along with lactic acid and that is the
amino acid glutamine. And unfortunately
Warberg nor the rest of the field
actually understand that they think
glutamine is respired. It's actually
fermented. We have a big paper that just
came out showing that. Um which is the
missing link in Warberg's central
theory. Uh enhanced fermentation is the
common pathophysiological malady of all
major cancers. That is what we do know
that what that means is that cancer
cells are getting their energy from a a
different source than normal cells.
Uh this is our recent most recent paper
just came out published in the journal
of bioenergetics and biomemembranes
where I go through and show where
everybody had made mistakes that the
failed experiments the the missing
control groups and this kind of thing
cleaning up the mess for almost 100
years and allowing people to see the
actual research and the experiments that
were done and how we reinterpret them
and now it's open for people to
re-evaluate this whole cancer mess.
Well, people say, "Are you sure the
mitochondria are dysfunctional in
cancer?" Why don't we look at them
under the electron microscope?
Okay, you see that? That beautiful
electron, those stripes, lines, those
are called the christe. They contain the
proteins and the lipids of the electron
transport chain allowing us to get
energy through oxidative
phosphorilation.
Here's the the uh the mitochondria of a
glyopblastoma, deadly brain cancer. And
you can see they call it crytoysis. You
don't see those stripes. The the
structure of that organel is abnormal.
Structure determines function for crying
out loud. If you if the if the structure
of the organel is abnormal, the function
of the organel is going to be abnormal.
Well, that's glyobblasto.
What about other cancers? Well, there's
breast cancer. Nice cris vaculated
christ they're fermenting colurectal
cancer we have u
ghost mitochondria there structure
determines function if the structure of
the organel is abnormal the function is
going to be abnormal oh but that's only
I went through every damn one of these
major cancers for crying out loud
it's not easy you have to go back and
read all these papers from all these age
generations and stuff and then you have
to go through none of these guys which
They were just interested in what
morphology looked like. Morphologists.
And in all of these major cancers, you
find abnormalities in the number,
structure, and function of mitochondria
in all these major cancers.
Okay? Um, blood cancers, every solid
cancer. These represent 95% of all the
deaths that we have are from these
cancers here.
And not only that, I went back and saw
this. Turns out that all the major
cancers collect big lipid drops in the
cytoplasm. LD is a big lipid drop next
to an abnormal mitochondria.
I said, "Isn't that interesting?" And
then we went and saw lipid drops and
colctal cancer, blood cancers, breast
cancers, all the different kinds of
cancers that have abnormalities and
number structure and function of
mitochondria store these big ass lipid
drops in the cytoplasm. You can see
them.
Turns out that when you have a defective
mitochondria, they can't burn ketones or
fatty acids. And in order to protect
themselves, they store these as droplets
in the cytoplasm. That's telling us that
these cells are not able to use fatty
acids for energy because if they try to
use the fatty acids for energy, you get
reactive oxygen species and blow the
damn cell up. So, this is a protection
mechanism. But 90% of the papers in my
field say because cancer is a genetic
disease, those lipids are there to feed
the mitochondria fats. I say, "How can
that be? The damn cell the mitochondria
defective in structure and function."
Oh, I didn't know that.
Jesus, you know.
Anyway, this is the diagram from our
recent most recent paper.
Um,
you know, people say, "How do you get
cancer?" Well, uh, that was St. Gorgi's
ankcogenic paradox. Almost everything in
the environment you know about can cause
cancer. Different amounts and different
types. Carcinogens. Yes, that's why we
call them. They cause cancer. Something
they they damage the structure and
function of the mitochondria. And now we
have these forever chemicals which are
piled on top of all the other things we
have in the environment. intermittent
hypoxia,
radiation, age, rare germline mutations.
We have a major paper coming out showing
all those inherited cancers that you
hear about. Bracka 1 and all these
others, leaf ramen, many they they all
damage in one way or another the
structure and function of the
mitochondria. Then we have encogenic
viruses. Yes, they go into the
mitochondria blow out oxidative
phosphorilation forcing the cell into a
ferment fermentation disregulated synrol
inflammation and microplastics
and um Faith Anne little girl here I
don't know she's here she's going to
give us a little talk on that she's
becomes an expert now and microplastics
and bubble gum
>> right so she'll give you a a lecture on
that uh I'll leave that to her
discussion we have anka genes and and
now we have uh what happens when you
screw up the mitochondria
you get Ross R O S and that's the super
oxide annion and the and the hydroxide
that knocks the hell out of the genome
causes all the mutations causes
chromosomal defects so you have to see
genoming instability sematic mutations
those are all downstream effects
of damage to the oxidative
phosphorilation will someone tell the
national cancer institute that
information
we're spending millions and millions of
dollars hunting for gene mutations all
cause those downstream effects of
oxidative disruption, oxidative
phosphorilation. Now when the cell h
when that happens, the cell starts to
suffocate ankco genes, the h if1 alpha,
mick and all these others are open the
floodgates for fuels for fermentation
energy. Once you stop oxidative
phosphorilation, you must replace the
energy and we use these ancient pathways
of fermentation uh facilitated by the
action of ankco genes. So the anka genes
are facilitators. If you make normal
mitochondria back in those cells, the
ankco genes turn off. You don't need
them.
Oh, I want to go back one more. Th this
here we got it. Now, how do we connect
it to disregulated cell growth? So, so
we know we can get disregulated because
the mitochondria control the cell cycle
through cyclones and the the gradient in
the inner membrane of the mitochondria.
So, cyclones. So, when it's like liver,
when they have to regenerate, when liver
cells regenerate, they grow in a
regulated way. Okay? But hippatoma is a
liver cancer that grows in a
disregulated way. So what's happening is
that the the liver regeneration is based
on oxfost. Hpa is based on substrate
level phosphorilation which is
fermentation. And because they acidify
the micro environment crapping out the
waste products, you get a lot of
angioenesis in there. People say, well
mitochondria control the life and death
of the cell, right? Yeah. They they
control apoptosis.
They are the kill switch. If the kill
switch doesn't work, cancer cells bypass
the natural death pathways. Perfectly
explainable. Um, aptosis evasion. And I
don't have time to talk about all of our
years of work on metastasis. We know
what metastatic cancer is. It's a fusion
between a cancer stem cell and a
macroofage in our body. One of the most
powerful cells and that spreads around
your body. Because it's so glutamine
dependent, we now know how to kill it. I
don't have time to talk about that, but
we can manage very easily metastatic
cancers. So we have here on the bottom
the red line is the replacement of
oxidative phosphorilation with the
ancient pathway of substrate level
phosphorilation. And you can see the the
the greater the the greater the
substrate level phosphorilation the
greater the malignancy.
This is just as strong relationship as
gravity is to Einstein's red shift.
Now let's break it down a little bit
more. So we here's we have normal
metabolism and we know glucose is the
fuel for making pyuvate through the
10-step Mden Myhoff pawns pathway in the
cytoplasm. Py pyuvate goes into the
mitochondria is fully oxidized to CO2
and water.
I'm breathing. Okay, get my oxygen in
and I blow out CO2 and and water. Those
are the waste products of normal
biological respiration. And you can see
90% of our energy. But you see we get
small amounts of energy in the cytoplasm
through the glycolytic pathway and we
get a little bit of energy through the
KB cycle. That's called substrate level
phosphorilations.
You see that? Now let's look at the
cancer cell. You see the huge shift? See
the energy now is coming out of these
substrate level phosphorilation
pathways. You get a bigger amount of
total energy much less coming out of
oxidative phosphorilation. And when the
cell does that it loses its the growth
controls. These cells are falling back
on ancient pathways that existed before
oxygen came into the atmosphere two and
a half billion years ago. So they're
being fueled by these ancient pathways
of substrate level phosphorilation
with the waste products of lactic acid
and suinic acid, not CO2 and water.
Lactic acid and suinic acid. These
cancer cells are crapping out those
molecules and all the major cancers.
The cancer cells have been telling us
for decades what the what's wrong with
them. We have just chosen to ignore it.
Now, this is a real nice diagram put
together by Derek Lee, my PhD student.
Um, glucose and glutamine are the
drivers of disregulated cell growth in
the cancer cells. And we can show how
the carbons of glucose, the carbons of
glutamine and the nitrogen of glutamine
can be so powerfully synergistic in
driving the growth of these cancer
cells. And we have put together all the
major pathways which I don't have time
to go through each one of these but you
can see that there's a powerful synergy
between using glucose and glutamine
together.
And what happens is they produce lactic
acid and suinic acid acidifying the
micro environment. People say, "Oh, you
know, these cancer cells are so tough.
They're so hard to kill." Imunotherapy
didn't work. Radiation didn't work.
Chemo didn't work. because they're
protecting themselves with metabolic
waste.
What happens if you pull the plug on the
two fuels driving the disregulated cell
growth and the production of waste?
They're very vulnerable to death, easy
to kill,
not that smart.
You hear all this these crazy terms came
up very smart cell. Very smart cell. Are
you kidding me? Who would say something
stupid like that?
They have a growth advantage. Oh, I love
the growth advantage over what? A cell
that's not programmed to grow. A liver
cell can outgrow a tumor cell when it
has to grow. So, if most cancer cells
obtained energy through fermentation,
what therapies might be effective for
managing and preventing cancer? Well,
one approach is to reduce the fuels that
are driving the dam, right? So, they
need glucose. They need glucose. Glucose
doesn't cause cancer. I don't know who
the hell would say something like that.
It's not good. The cancers cell love to
eat it, but it's not going to cause
cancer. Okay, you lower you got to lower
the sugar and you got to raise the fatty
acids and ketone bodies. How do you do
that? Water only fasting, ketogenic
diets, and this kind of stuff because I
showed you the lipids are gorging the
cytoplasm. It can't use those fuels. So,
the purpose of raising ketones and fatty
acids is to let other cells in our body
thrive because our all of our other
cells can burn either fatty acids or
ketones. the brain, all these other
organs, not the tumor cell. So, let's
get the person transition to nutritional
ketosis first and then go after their
fermentable fuels, lower that lower that
um glucose. And this is one of our
earlier experiments on brain cancer in a
mouse, which is a kind of a neural stem
cell tumor. Neural stem, everybody here,
oh, big air, neural stem cell, neural
stem cell. Yes, they grow, they grow
very fast, but they don't metastasize.
So, metastatic cancer is more more
deadly than this. Anyway, AL is eating a
high carbohydrate diet unrestricted
amounts add libidum uh give them as much
mouse carbohydrate mouse chow calorie
restriction CR. So what we simply did
was we cut the calories down by 40%. Uh
in these mice and uh we shrank that
tumor down you can see by anywhere from
65 to 80% reduction in the size of the
tumor. Um I said wow wow it's really
powerful. I mean, all you had to do is
pull the food away from the damn mouse
and these tumors. So, um, yeah, it
seemed that I said, "Wow, that's really
interesting." Uh, so then we did it much
deeper. We did a lot of work on this.
This was way back in 03 02. Um, each
square is a mouse under a different
dietary uh program. Um, and we use in
this we use linear regression. We didn't
do correlation. We linear regression. We
we chose glucose as the independent
variable and beta hydroxybutyrate and
tumor weight as the dependent variables.
As glucose goes down, ketones go up.
It's an evolutionally conserved
adaptation. And in humans, it's even
much much bigger than the what the mouse
can do. Um, as glucose goes down, the
size of the tumor goes down. The higher
the circulating blood glucose in the
bloodstream, the faster the tumor grows.
The lower the sugar, the slower it
grows. Wow.
Okay. I we did this the first in the
mouse and then they said let's see does
it happen in humans. Of course we have
dozens and dozens of papers in the
scientific lit literature saying humans
who have blood blood high blood sugar if
they have cancer don't live as long as
humans that have lower blood sugar. In a
bit wow gez unbelievable.
So if you want your tumor to grow fast
make sure you get your damn sugar up as
high as it can get it.
People like to race. Oh, your tumeric
can grow faster than mine.
Then we built the glucose ketone index
calculator. During this Q&A, I can I
have stories about everything, right?
This what do you think? I just pulled
this stuff out of my butt. You know,
this is
you know,
oh yeah, wow, we have a problem here.
Let's think. Do we can we figure out a
way to handle this problem? So it would
be better to measure com combination. We
had to take blood sugar millar ketone
millolar and make a ratio because we
found out it's not just lowering
glucose. It's not just elevating
ketones. You have to do both to allow
the body to transition naturally into
these new physiological states. So we
made this ratio and we found and
predicted that ratios 2.0 zero and below
are therapeutic for managing cancer and
not just brain cancer all cancers. Then
we built the the um press pulse. Another
long story about how we did that. Um
press pulse therapeutic strategies. You
can press glucose down. We heard it's a
non-necessary nutrient and we don't need
glucose. Push it down as low as you can
get it and run. Muscles will take and do
a lot of different kinds of things. Keep
your G GKI as low as you can. Uh, ketone
supplements, stress management,
extremely important. People who are
diagnosed with cancer, oh, I'm doomed.
I'm going to die, you know. Oh, geez.
Raises corticosteroids, makes sugar
high. We got to manage stress. Manage
stress. You're not going to die if you
know what to do.
Then we pulse in drugs that will target
glucose. We have to be very strategic
about this. We just can't say one dose
fits all. We are strategically targeting
glutamine and glucose with small drugs
while the patient is in nutritional
ketosis.
We move the person from a state of ter
his terminal condition always stage four
terminal and we try to move him then
into a state of management where we make
the tumor much less angry. We have now
time to work with this patient to test
things. Dosage, timing, and scheduling
is where we are right now in the
eventual management and control of this
disease. Problem is, learning about
doses and timing and scheduling is not
sexy science.
Hard to get funding for that,
but that's what's that's what's
ultimately going to be what's going to
happen.
So, and we use hyperbaric oxygen as a
replacement for radiation because once
you get that tumor cell into a
metabolically compromised state, it
becomes extremely vulnerable to high
pressure oxygen.
Now, let's test this press pulse
therapeutic strategy for a a mouse. I we
developed these models spontane they was
a spontaneous model, not these
genetically engineered monstrosities
that most of the scientific literature
is filled with. Five minutes. I just
started.
Guysy's telling me I got five minutes.
I didn't take up the time in the
beginning, my friend.
Give me a break here. I come all the way
from Boston. I got 5 minutes.
Jesus Christ.
10 minutes. Hey
Why don't we do 15?
I'll tell you what, you got to see the
results, people. I'm just giving you the
science
because if I gave you the results
without the science, you'd say, "I I
don't believe any of this stuff." Okay,
listen. We try here's we we we we
stratified the the mice. Let me let me
speed it up. You speed it up here for
Christ. Get me the hook here. Okay, so
listen. We take a glutamine targeting
drug, calorie restricted ketogenic diet.
And I'm not going to go through all the
details of the experiments, but you can
see the blue line of the guys just
loving the high carb food died quick.
Green line, little bit of improvement.
Uh orange line is the d is the dawn
drug, a glutamine targeting drug. And
when we put the two drugs together, the
drug and the diet, you can see how much
longer the animals live. We're really
really pushing extremes here. Okay, now
this is human. Let's go talk about human
glyobl human glyobblasto. deadly brain
cancer. Deadly. You can see the midline
shift. Most of these poor folks die from
intercraanial pressure. And the the
tumor cells, the purple cells on this
hisytologology slide are cells running
across the surface of of the the Vircow
Robin space. So you spread the tumor
cells throughout the brain. That's why
they're not surgically reectable
completely. And there's a survival curve
from five Canadian institutions. Look
how replicable. No, look how beautiful
the results are. The survival is so poor
and replicated from one institution to
the next. And this survival curve could
be here in England, United States,
China, Japan, all over the world. You
don't survive very long with
glyobblasto.
Why is that? And look, no improvement
100 years. Are you kidding me? 100 years
we haven't improved survival for
glyopblasto. We have web telescopes
around this the earth looking at the
origin of the universe and we haven't
made any survi major advance in
survival.
And we found out that the treatment
itself when you treat a gly glyopblast
you surgically resect and then you start
the irradiation of the brain and you
break apart the glutamine glutamate
cycle the brain starts to swell from the
heat. You give the patient a lot of
steroids make the blood sugar go real
high. You're feeding all of the fuels
that the tumor cell needs to be very
aggressive by the very treatment that
you're giving to the patient.
We tried this guy. He's Egyptian came
in. He had glyopblastoma. my colleague,
this is from Alexander, Egypt, young man
about 26 years old. He he um he he his
turmo was rected. We did a lot of good
stuff on this guy and then they said,
"We got to ardate him." I said, "Why do
you want to radiate? The kids are really
healthy." "Oh, no. We must do it. We
must to do it." Not we didn't have a
choice. We must do it. So, we we did it.
And then what happens? The guy goes back
as a corn farmer. Goes back out working
in the fields. He comes in and he and
he's got a headache. We published this
paper 24-month follow-up. Everybody was
excited. Then he starts getting
headaches. in 30 months he's dead. Oh,
what happened? So, Elsaka, first author
here, did a I said, "We're going to do
an autopsy on this guy and see what
happened." They they they didn't find
any tumor cells. He died from radiation
induced liquefiation of the brain.
I said, "What the hell? I told you not
to irdiate the guy." Well, we have to do
it. Now, this is Britney Maynard. She
she young lady from California. Uh she
diagnosed GBM 2014. Um you can see her
face here. She is right after she got
married. Look at her moon. Moon moon
face is highdose steroids. You get moon
moonf face from highdose steroids. That
means her blood sugars are through the
roof. Um she says, "I don't want to do
this anymore. I'm going to take my own
life. Die with dignity." Wow. Then she
writes an article in Put People magazine
telling everybody why she doesn't want
to go through standard of care and she's
going to take her own life. It's not
good when your patients kill themselves
before they would take your par with
your your treatment. Not good. Now, this
guy is our English friend here, Pablo
from Devon, England. Uh he talked to
Andrew Scarboro who's here. Uh maybe we
should do metabol. Andrew was one of
these guys who didn't want to do any any
stuff. He just said, "No, I don't want
to do that." He was no radiation, no
chemo, no surgery. They said, "You have
an inoperable brain tumor. If you don't
do radi if you don't do radiation and
chemo, uh you're going to be dead in
nine months." He said, "I'll take my
risk." So we we put him on this meta. I
didn't know much at that time. He was
like kind of our experimental case. He
survived for a long time. He had Idh1
mutation. Uh this is his brain tumor at
the beginning. And then it grew very
slowly and he did a debulking surgery
about two years after his first
diagnosis. Um now why I published Pablo
is because he kept meticulous records of
his GKI, his glucose ketone index. So we
have data to support why he lived so
long. His GKIs were always down in the
low. So I don't I can't don't have time
to tell you everything. Uh but we
published him as a case report to how
powerful ketogenic metabolic therapy can
be if done the right way. And Pablo was
a pioneer in this in this field.
Unfortunately, Pablo passed away at
immediately after the fourth debulking
surgery of his previously inoperable
brain tumor. Can you believe this? We
spoke to him a week before he passed
away. He had a cerebral hemorrhage in
the last uh debulking surgery that ended
up killing him. Unfortunately, good
friend Andrew and Pablo were very close.
Um now this is our another recent study
that just came out of our our group from
from Greece. Um they took 18 glyobblasto
patients and um 12 of them didn't do it
was a calorierestricted Mediterranean
diet. What salmon, sardines, olive oil,
avocados and that kind of stuff. And and
you can see the ones that stuck at four
out of six survived beyond three years
uh doing this. And somebody said, "Wow,
this is really remarkable." Uh this if
we had a drug that did this would be
great. What did you do? I said
calorierestricted Mediterranean diet.
Oh, we're not interested in that.
Absurd, right?
Anyway,
provocative question. Yes, metabol
ketogenic metabolic therapy should be
the standard of care. This little tragic
case, little Danny Sheen, he has a what
they call childhood glyopblastoma. It's
called pinealoblast. And childhood, they
go down the spinal cord. You get a lot
of spinal cord involvement on this,
right? So Danny diagnosed 2017. You can
see how fat his face is. Massive dose of
steroids, surgical, the same stuff.
Surgery, radiation, blood sugar high.
Here he is a week before he passes away
with his favorite Aquaman toy. Um, a
tragedy. What the hell are we doing to
these kids? This is this is
unconscionable. So, I got so pissed off
I I built my own uh metabolic pediatric
model that replicated what goes on in
Danny's brain and others. We had tumor
cells going down the spine of the mice.
So, we replicated what goes on in
high-grade pediatric. And we did I we
have a movie if you guys want to see how
healthy these guys are on the right.
Look at their code color. They're
running around. They're enjoying life.
They have restricted diet MBZ. This is a
parasite medication. and uh gone and
they live so much longer. And this is a
case we have Dr. Sloum here. He's here
in the audience if you want to check
out. Uh he we had this woman from from
uh uh Cleveland, Ohio, metastatic breast
cancer to her bone to her brain all over
the place. Lit up like a Christmas tree
for crying out loud. She flies to Dr.
Slokum's clinic in Istanbul and they
worked on her and you can see how much
how this was a complete response. And he
he tells me she's still doing well.
She's still doing well. He's here. You
going doc, he can talk to him. Look at
her. She's happy. Um, we did it with a
lung cancer guy, non small cell lung
cancer. Guy's live 10 years. It went to
the brain, went to the bones, metabolic
therapy. I did a puff piece for nature,
prostate cler.
You can you can manage that. This is our
big paper that we just came out with.
And I have those. Isabelle is here,
Matt's here, Abdul Sloum is here,
Anthony is here, and Tom Durai, the
first author, will be the leader of the
field in the next several years. He and
I published, and we have all of our
colleagues, dieticians, surgeons, and
all kinds of people on this paper. This
is the clinical uh path to managing
cancer,
all cancers. I don't have time to talk
about it, obviously. I'm going to be get
the hook here,
but anyway, it works on your dogs. Okay,
we have a dog here, a pitbull. He had a
big tumor on his nose. Uh, and uh, she
just put him on raw raw chicken. Oh my
god.
Raw chicken, raw eggs, fish oil, and the
tumor uh, just kind of melted away. And
uh, no surgery, no radiation, no chemo.
The dog died from old age of heart
disease.
15 and a half years a pitbull. Much he
lived much longer than the breed.
So, so what we have uh I don't consider
these cancers stage four anymore.
Uh I think we we're all terminal.
Why do we have to make some people more
terminal than others? We have a chance
to keep people alive if they do
metabolic therapy. So the answer here is
yes.
mitochondrial theory can better explain
the origin of management of cancer than
can the sematic mutation theory. Please
someone tell the national cancer
institute that. I'm hoping RFK knows
about that. Anyway, um we have uh let me
conclude by we have um it's a metabolic
disease driven by mitochondrial
substrate and cytoplasmic substrate.
Press pulse is a therapeutic strategy.
We are now working on strategies to
manage all major chronic diseases. We're
going to bring the the the hammer down
on those things in no time. We're doing
it now and we're working on it now. So,
brace yourselves. Now, the other thing
is uh we started a new society,
international society of metabolic
oncology. Uh we're getting people
dieticians, nutrition, surgeons, all
kinds of uh renegade oncologists that
want to join the society. Uh Janick
Nathan from Mumbai, India is our
secretary. So, we're putting this all
together and um let me just say I get
all my money from private foundations
and philanthropy.
No gift to us is too small or too large.
This is the way we work. Okay. The more
money we get, the faster we deal with
the problem. So, I want to thank all
those who have supported our work listed
here, individuals and foundations, and
thank you for your attention.
[Applause]
[Music]
Thank you.
[Applause]